README.md, before:

[![licence](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/)
[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/badge/Install%20with-PyPI-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](https://pypi.org/project/calcs/)
[![install with bioconda](https://img.shields.io/badge/Install%20with-Bioconda-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](https://anaconda.org/bioconda/calcs)

## Description

`calcs` is a command-line tool to append a [minimap2's CS tag](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2#cs) to a SAM file.  


> :warning: This tool will be maintained until [the samtools team implements the official CS tag caller](https://github.com/samtools/samtools/issues/1264).

## Installation

You can install `calcs` using pip:

```bash
pip install calcs
```

Alternatively, you can get `calcs` from bioconda:

```
conda install -c bioconda calcs
```

## Usage

```bash
calcs [options] <in.sam> -r/--reference <in.fasta>
```

## Options

```bash
-l/--long: output a cs tag in the long form
-t/--threads [INT]: number of threads to use (default: 1)
```

## Examples

```bash
# CS tag (short form)
calcs examples/example.sam --reference examples/ref.fa > example_cs.sam

# CS tag (long form)
calcs examples/example.sam --reference examples/ref.fa --long > example_cslong.sam

# PAF format with CS tag (short form)
calcs examples/example.sam --reference examples/ref.fa --paf > example_cs.paf

# PAF format with CS tag (long form)
calcs examples/example.sam --reference examples/ref.fa --paf --long > example_cslong.paf

# Multiprocessing
calcs examples/example.sam --reference examples/ref.fa --threads 4 > example_cs.sam
```

If the input file is a BAM/CRAN format, you can use `samtools view`.

```bash
samtools view examples/example.bam |
  calcs -l -r examples/ref.fa |
  samtools sort > example_cslong.bam
```

## `paftools.js sam2paf` vs `calcs`

[paftools.js sam2paf](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2/blob/master/misc/README.md) is anoter command to generate a CS tag.  
Here is the comparison between `sam2paf` and `calcs`.

|                     | sam2paf                    | calcs      |
| ------------------- | -------------------------- | ---------- |
| Speed               | +                          | -          |
| Call a CS tag       | + (if SAM includes a MD tag) | +          |
| Output format       | PAF                        | SAM or PAF |

Commit message:

add the comparison with `cstag-cli`

README.md, after:

[![licence](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/)
[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/badge/Install%20with-PyPI-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](https://pypi.org/project/calcs/)
[![install with bioconda](https://img.shields.io/badge/Install%20with-Bioconda-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](https://anaconda.org/bioconda/calcs)

## Description

`calcs` is a command-line tool specifically designed to append a [minimap2's cs tag](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2#cs) to a SAM file.  

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Since `calcs` requires the computational time, we recommend using `calcs` only when your SAM file does not have MD tags.

> [!NOTE]
> [`cstag-cli`](https://github.com/akikuno/cstag-cli) and [paftools.js sam2paf](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2/blob/master/misc/README.md) are alternative tools that also facilitate the appending of a cs tag to sequence alignment files. 
> For a detailed comparison of these tools, see [the comparison](https://github.com/akikuno/calcs?tab=readme-ov-file#comparison-with-other-tools)

> [!NOTE]
> This tool will be maintained until [the samtools team implements the official cs tag caller](https://github.com/samtools/samtools/issues/1264).

## Installation

You can install `calcs` using pip:

```bash
pip install calcs
```

Alternatively, you can get `calcs` from bioconda:

```
conda install -c bioconda calcs
```

## Usage

```bash
calcs [options] <in.sam> -r/--reference <in.fasta>
```

## Options

```bash
-l/--long: output a cs tag in the long form
-t/--threads [INT]: number of threads to use (default: 1)
```

## Examples

```bash
# cs tag (short form)
calcs examples/example.sam --reference examples/ref.fa > example_cs.sam

# cs tag (long form)
calcs examples/example.sam --reference examples/ref.fa --long > example_cslong.sam

# PAF format with cs tag (short form)
calcs examples/example.sam --reference examples/ref.fa --paf > example_cs.paf

# PAF format with cs tag (long form)
calcs examples/example.sam --reference examples/ref.fa --paf --long > example_cslong.paf

# Multiprocessing
calcs examples/example.sam --reference examples/ref.fa --threads 4 > example_cs.sam
```

If the input file is a BAM/CRAN format, you can use `samtools view`.

```bash
samtools view examples/example.bam |
  calcs -l -r examples/ref.fa |
  samtools sort > example_cslong.bam
```

## Comparison with other tools

Here is the brief comparison between `calcs`, `cstag-cli`, and `sam2paf`.

|               | calcs         |  cstag-cli                |  sam2paf            |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------------------- | ------------------- |
| Input         | SAM and FASTA |  SAM or BAM with a MD tag |  SAM with a MD tag  |
| Output format |  SAM or PAF   |  SAM or BAM               |  PAF                |
| Speed         | -             |  +                        |  +                  |


### Tool Selection Guide

- `calcs`: If your SAM file does not have MD tags, we recommend using `calcs`.
- `cstag-cli`: If your SAM or BAM file has MD tags and you expect SAM or BAM output, we recommend using `cstag-cli`.
- `sam2paf`: If your SAM file has MD tags and you expect PAF output, we recommend using `sam2paf`.
